---
path: "/rails-project"
date: "2018-03-05"
title: "Blockfolio, my Rails project"
---

So now it’s time to summarize my third project at Flatiron School, probably the the most time consuming one I've worked on so far. It involved building a Rails application, and I already had ideas on what to build before even starting. Cryptocurrencies is a bit of a buzzword these days and I wanted to continue explore the ideas I had in my mind. What if I could create a replica of the application I was using on my iPhone to track the cryptocurrency market. I wanted to create a website were the user could create their own portfolios and add their favorite cryptocurrency coins to it. The user would be able to check out other users portfolios and also check out the most valued ones.

The idea sounded simple but it had to include nested forms and join tables which can cause some headache from time to time. It also had to pull the data from an external API which I’ve never done previously. I started out with creating a spec for myself, mapping out all the requirements and what data I would need to pull from the API. I started off by mapping out my database schema and added in the models afterwards. This was fairly straightforward even though I had to change some of my datatypes later on to be able to store the big numbers that got returned from the API.

The first big roadblock I had was to setup the forms and the associated forms correctly. Setting up a nested form under a nested resource took some time to figure out but also what the correct associations to use in order to easily have a form that could be edited and also submitted. I ended up having my nested resource submit to the join table and associate the `belongs_to` coin to it during submit. My first approach was not use my join table inside any of the forms and just update the join table attribute after my model association but that became harder because I wanted to find an existing coin and not create a new one for the portfolio. Once I got the forms to work correctly it felt like the rest of the requirements was a bit easier to implement.

It’s been a true pleasure to work with rails and I’m looking forward to learn more about it, I feel like I’ve only touched the surface. Some of the features I would like to implement is caching for the API, right now I’m updating the data on most of the show and index pages but I would like to make it smarter and update in the background every 10 minutes or so. I would also like to put in some more time updating the styles, today is currently using bootstrap default styles and write more tests for my application. This is a project that I will go back and improve and continue to work on but now it’s time to move on and continue my learning journey.