---
path: "/regex"
date: "2017-08-18"
title: "Ruby Methods with Regex"
---

Happy Friday all! This lab was designed to get us comfortable using Regex in combination with the .match and .scan methods. Writing regex to pass the first 4 tests was fairly easy, but the last one took me a while to figure out. I made a decision to take as much time it would take me to figure this one out, it a was a great challenge and felt very much like a puzzle. I was using rubular.com to check if my regex was passing successfully validating the correct strings that the test was testing for, and I must say after looking at it the second day I finally started to understand what I was doing!

1. The first assignment was to write regex to returns true for words starting with a vowel. I knew that the vowels were aeiou so now I had to test a string for words that started with any of those letters.
    - The match method returns the first item in your string that matches a given Regular Expression as a MatchData object.
    - Regex needs to be written inside `/regex/`
    - `^`checks if the character is at the start of a line
    - `[aeiouAEIOU]` checks if any of the letters inside the square brackets are a match. Some vowels words may start with a capital letter so I had to check for both lowercase and uppercase letters.
    - I then return true if it successfully finds a vowel through the ternary operator
    
    ##### Solution
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/0ea67156bf2d58998e52af773a561524.js"></script>

2. Second assignment was to returns an array with the words starting with 'un' and ending with 'ing. The `scan` method returns an array so using that method felt like a good decision if I wanted to return an array with the words. The text had to start with `un`any characters`ing`. This can be done with the `\b` there are three different positions that qualify as word boundaries (http://www.regular-expressions.info/wordboundaries.html):
    - Before the first character in the string, if the first character is a word character.
    - After the last character in the string, if the last character is a word character.
    - Between two characters in the string, where one is a word character and the other is not a word character.
    
    ##### Solution
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/c8c7fa354393a55232df1f10f9be6020.js"></script>    

3. The third assignment asked you to create an method that returns an array of words that are five letters long. For this lab I also decided to use the scan method to get the returning answers into an array. The solution for this one was pretty similar to the second one, I had to check for a word with any letters as long it had 5 letters. This time I got introduced to `{}` the number specified within the curly brackets are the amount of letters that is required in our case 5 letters.
    
    ##### Solution
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/64b5e83a200ee70575e47bbd2339b8e0.js"></script>
    
4. The fourth assignment asked you to returns true for text starting with a capital letter and ending with punctuation. For boolean values we know that we can use the match method.  So we star with checking for capital letter as a first character through this regex `^[A-Z]`. We then test any character between a-z both lowercase and uppercase zero or more times through this regex `.*[a-zA-Z]` and then we end with checking for a punctuation at the end through `[.]$`
    
    ##### Solution
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/5db43395acab0cba7dfdb5f5d5f511da.js"></script>

5. The last one was definitely the most challenging one. I even had to step away from this one for a while and get back to it which as always made it easier to finish. After coming back to this one I finally started to understand what each character was doing, and I’m proud to say that I never gave up on this one even though I’ve seen a lot of people getting help on this one. The assignment asked to returns true for valid phone numbers, regardless of formatting and false for invalid phone numbers.

  **The valid phone numbers:**
  
    `["2438894546", "(718)891-1313", "234 435 9978", "(800)4261134"]` 
  
  **The invalid phone numbers:**
  
    `["28894546", "(718)891-13135", "234 43 9978", "(800)IloveNY"]`
  
    - So I started of by checking if the for the parentheses and make them optional through `\(?` I then checked for 3 digits inside the parentheses with `\d{3}` and after that I also checked for optional parentheses again with `\)?` after that I checked for at least 3 numbers with an optional - through `\d{3}-?\d{4}`  that would make the two valid numbers with parentheses work.
    - After that i wrote a regex to pass the other two, and that could be done with the or | which is fairly similar to double pipe we use in ruby `||`. If the phone number didn’t start with parentheses we need to cover one of the cases were we have 3 numbers and then a space which we can do with `\d{3}\s?` This checks for 3 numbers followed by a optional space which will work for the first number which doesn’t have a whitespace. We then end by checking for 4 numbers at the end with `\d{4}` which will work for both of them.
    
    ##### Solution
    <script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/6204237f18bc70ac9b6c289e76663a6a.js"></script>