---
path: "/loops"
date: "2017-09-12"
title: "Loops"
---

So the concept of looping is definitely something that takes time to get comfortable with, mainly because there is a lot of different ways you can loop through your code in Ruby. There is while loops, for in loops, times loop etc. There is also a very common pattern to iterate over something called an `Array` which basically is a list. You will face a lot of code when you need to loop through each of the items inside the `Array`  to either receive or manipulate the data inside the Array. Something you should keep in mind is that if you feel that you repeat yourself a lot there is most likely a better way of doing it, you should get used to the DRY concept which translates to Don’t Repeat Yourself. This is when looping comes in handy, when you want to print out something or go through a list without having to repeat the same code x times. A very basic example is if you would like to print a sentence 5 times. you can do something like this, which will print out the `String` “Hello” 5 times:
<script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/abb1d1e69b5f5c78682e6dfa62f0900c.js"></script>

 Or you can use the `.times` method in ruby and call on a `Integer`. So in order to run our code 5 times we do `5.times`, like this:
<script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/8910e6fc80a55f90c3c15f04e1a62d45.js"></script>

Both of these do the exact same thing but the last example is a lot easier to read and as a developer we like more efficient code because it’s daunting to repeat yourself 5 times, imaging having to repeat your self 30 times!

What if we want to count to 10? How can we add 1 to our counter each loop? This is where `while` or `until` comes in handy. We can do it all manually like in the previous example:
<script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/96ff5f84e39becd41ae3aa8f3a71e0ef.js"></script>

Or we can use the `while` loop and do something more elegant like this:
<script src="https://gist.github.com/scarsam/7dfb2f08dcad24e30f0791b3d01005de.js"></script>

It might feel unnecessary for just counting to 5 but imaging counting to 30. The second loop is also a lot more flexible and with this loop we can do a lot more than just counting. Something I really want to emphasize though is the golden role of not repeating yourself (DRY). Projects is usually a lot bigger than these examples and it’s important to optimize your code both performance wise but also make it more readable for the other developers your work with. Repeating your code makes it harder to read and also less useful for other developers to reuse your code for other tasks.